To get help.
This is about what is best for the Kiwi citizen, not what is best for the
government employee. I do want to make that point at the outset.
I look forward to hearing and reading every submission, but I can preempt
a few of the issues that might be raised, and I'd like to
just go through them now because I think they are worth our consideration.
So there will be some that will come and say legislation is not
required. There are other ways to do this.
And in the New Zealand Initiative submission,
that you will have, I'm sure, read, it talks about that this could be done
non-legislatively.
But as we read in the Local Government New Zealand submission, we've tried that for
years, and it hasn't worked.
We are still here with the same mess, the same confusion.
We've tried everything else. That's why people like LGNZ are
coming out and supporting a legislative approach.
Legislation is needed because nothing else has worked.
Some will say that the boundaries are irrelevant, doesn't matter
where the help comes from. People just want to know that it's out there, and we had
reflections of that in some first reading speeches.
The point is, the help isn't coming. People aren't able to access it.
Let me take you through a couple of examples.
I used one of these, I think, in the first reading.
It's a gentleman from Ōtaki who has leukemia and
gets some specialist treatment for his condition from Wellington.
But with some other health complications as well.
If he has needs to call an ambulance, which happens sometimes,
if it's not related to leukemia, the ambulance takes him to
Palmerston North, where they don't have access to his records, they
don't have the level of care, they don't have those that are familiar with his
situation. So on three occasions now,
three times, his partner has driven him to hospital instead of calling an
ambulance. The issue isn't that
we could just pick up 111 and an ambulance will eventually turn up. I get that.
He understands that. The point is, because of these boundaries, it isn't
working for him. Three times he has had to get his partner to drive him
to the hospital instead. I spoke to a couple of staff from Ruapehu
College in Ōhakune,
and one of them, who's now running another school,
told me,
in fact, they both told me about this situation where when they need help, it comes
from three different places. Sometimes it comes from Whanganui,
sometimes it comes from Taumarunui, sometimes it comes from Taihape.
They've even had it from Turangi and as far away as Rotorua.
So there was one case where they were dealing with Oranga Tamariki police and MSD.
One office was in Whanganui, one was in
Taumarunui, and one was in Taihape.
They would ring one, say, "We need you to come," and they'd talk to the other
agency. "No, no, it's coming from Taumarunui." So they'd ring the one in
Taumarunui. "No, no, no, no. You need to go to Taihape." And around they go.
And it is people like this that are trying to do their best to help people in our
community, that are trying to help, in this case, students in their
school, that are not able to access the help, not
because you can't pick up the phone and there's someone there, but because they get
caught in the gap of all these overlapping boundaries.
And we read in other submissions, examples from
Taupō and the Waikato, from Tasman, from Southland.
This is not an isolated example. This is something that is happening
across the country. Change is needed because people are slipping through
the cracks.
There is a fundamental point here, in my bill, that everyone
just needs to align to one single boundary.
Now, some will say that local government boundaries or council boundaries
might be a line, but it's in the wrong place.
I'm asking us not to miss the bigger point.
The bigger point is that it's not about where the line is.
We can draw the line somewhere else.
The point is that there is one single shared line that
every agency
uses.
There have been some suggestions that it could be iwi boundaries.
I understand why some people suggest that.
I just think about my area around Levin, around Tai Toko,
and iwi won't agree on where that boundary is between Muapoko and
Raukawa. And Kapiti, where's the boundary between Raukawa and Te Āti
Aokī for Rongotai and Ngāti Toa?
The issue is that if they, think of the
Levin case, if you can't agree on where the boundary is between iwi, we'll never
get everyone else to agree on it.
I'm open to the line being somewhere else.
If it's not a local government boundary, that's fine.
Council is just the starting point.
They do have a civil defense function which translates into direct
services. I think of Kapiti, where Ōtaki comes under Kapiti for civil defense, but
the police that will support that operation come from
Levin. We've had examples like the flood in 2015, where they're
literally separated by a river and a bridge, and they can't both get to the same
place, but they're coming from different directions.
There is intentional room in the bill for exceptions.
It's just that they should align to the greatest degree possible.
I know that there'll be examples where maybe the council boundary doesn't work, or
for one agency, there's a good reason why it needs to be slightly different.
That's okay. But at the moment, if we're honest, we're not even trying.
That we are not even attempting to align boundaries where there are really
simple workarounds that might only affect a small population
here and a small one here. They won't require staff to move.
They won't require officers to move.
I would challenge that there is no pragmatic cost involved.
But we're not even attempting to align the boundaries.
And the example of regional commissioners that their boundaries don't even line up
is a good one. MSD splitting Waipounamu in half down a notional boundary
on a railway line.
There are many examples that we could point to.
As I say, though, I'm open to better ideas, and I do want to just pick up the
point that
I think there's a perception that the lines will only be on council boundaries.
Let's take Auckland as an example.
Clearly, Auckland will be made up of more than one administrative
area. It is a massive area. No one is suggesting there will only be
one office or one place for service in all of Auckland for MSD.
That will be broken up into building blocks.
The point is that those building blocks all share the same boundaries across every
organization, across MSD and Kainga Ora, and
across health, and across justice, and across all the Crown
agencies.
The point that we're trying to get to here is that if you live in one area, you
should only have to go in one consistent direction to
get help.
And that consistency of the consistent boundaries, consistent lines, makes it
easier for mom and dad to understand, I think, where to get
help and how to get help, and that leads to better outcomes for
families. That's what this is about.
I also think, though, that consistent lines aid staff relationships.
I heard from one mayor who has 10 organizations come to his monthly
social services meeting, but represented by, this is a Crown agency, he's
represented by 25 staff because of the overlapping boundaries.
And that illustrates the fact that you can't just pick up, if you work
in one area, I don't know, MSD or Oranga Tamariki, you
can't just pick up the phone and ring the same person each time because you're
dealing with different agencies, depending on which part of your area it goes with.
We can have consistent relationships to get better, consistent outcomes.
The point is that consistency is needed to make access to
help easier.
Some people will say that it shouldn't apply to all agencies.
I think there's a good point here. I think New Zealand Initiative raised it around
ones that don't directly deal with people.
Department of Conservation is one example.
We heard in the initial briefing, perhaps transport, where they're not actually
dealing with customers.
I'm open to these ideas. I think there is maybe some logic to the ones that don't
deal with people, particularly those that deal with the environment, looking at
catchments. But catchments don't work when you come to the people-focused
agencies because it's not a natural boundary, and people don't live in
the same way that water lives. So I think we should consider this.
I think consideration is needed because
good improvements, sensible improvements, are worth incorporating to the
bill.
Last two.
Some will say that we should pare it back and just give vague direction.
We shouldn't be so prescriptive. We should just say, "Look, try and do a little bit
better.
That will make it easier for the government departments." I understand that
argument,
but this is frankly not about them.
We got to where we are now because each agency is doing what
is best for that agency.
And I have no
doubt that that is the easiest way to keep going moving forward.
But we shouldn't mistake
a smooth sailing for a successful voyage.
This isn't about what makes the machinery of government best.
This is about how do we get better outcomes.
And I think true efficiency lies not in the friction-free motion
of Crown agencies, but in the ultimate delivery of meaningful results.
So I want us to remember that context of who it is that we're trying to help and
why. So perspective is needed because this is about the people we
serve, not the government who serves them.
Finally, some will say that this is happening too fast.
I actually think this has taken far too long, but there will be questions raised,
and I understand why, about amalgamation headstart pathway for
councils. I'd just point out that if this bill comes into
effect, it will be in the middle of next year.
The five-year period will take us to the middle of 2032, not just
after the headstart pathway and the next council elections, but after the one after
that, once we're all organized in boundaries.
I think there are some pragmatic workarounds here.
There will be some
local government boundaries that are sorted about the time that this comes into
effect. They then have five years to work around it.
The others will work through over the first three years, and we'll know that we'll
then have two years to move those into effect.
I don't think there'll actually be huge surprises in terms of where those groups of
people are. And as I said before, it might be that, I don't know, Kapiti and
Horowhenua decide to amalgamate, but they'll already be organized in their two
little buckets, and they just become one bigger council with two
defined sort of those building blocks.
But there are some other practical suggestions that I think are pragmatic.
I think Local Government New Zealand suggested, well, why don't we just
give them a later start point for the legislation, a delayed
coming into effect, but with a shorter run-up.
Effectively, let's preserve the date that this all kicks in,
in about 2032-ish,
where it starts. So look, I'm open to arguments here either
way.
The point is that small towns like Otaki shouldn't be left to slip through the
cracks just because it would make it easier for others.
So I still think progress is needed because our history is
littered with excuses to delay. So let me just summarize the
six points I'm trying to make. One, legislation is needed because nothing else has
worked. Two, change is needed because people are slipping through the
cracks. Consistency is needed to make accessing help
easier.
Consideration is needed because there are sensible improvements worth
incorporating. Perspective is needed because this is about the
people we serve, not the government serving itself.
And finally, progress is needed because our history is littered with
excuses to delay. Legislative change,
consistency and consideration, perspective, and progress.
That's what I'm asking for from this committee.
This is not about the work of those who serve, but the experience of
those we serve. This is not about the elegance of the process,
but the excellence of the impact, and I look forward to working with you all to
improve and progress this bill with the overarching purpose of improving the
support Kiwis get from their government. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Tim. I do have a question from Melissa.
Hi, Tim.
Hi.
Thank you for this
bill. And I think during the first reading, I actually talked about some of the
frustrations even Auckland had with the boundaries and the
services they actually
not get because of the crossover between agencies covering different
areas. The question I actually had was in terms,
when you opened, you actually talked about the man from Otaki who
had cancer and who was getting treatment in Wellington.
But when you call the ambulance, he gets taken to Palmerston North.
Why is that? Did they not tell the ambulance that he was a cancer
patient who was being treated in Wellington?
So the boundaries for the DHB, the PHO, and the ambulances, which are
contracted by Health NZ, are all different.
Just like courts, justice, corrections, all different around Otaki.
So they cannot take-
So there is an MoU in place where they try and pick up some of those,
because St. John's naturally feed into Palmerston North Hospital, Wellington Free
feed into Wellington. They live in an area that gets other services from
Wellington, but the ambulance goes to Palmerston North.
There is an MoU in place that I think now that gentleman is at the point where if
he has a leukemia issue, the ambulance can take him for certain
examples to... But if he rings up to say, "Well, I've fallen over and hurt
myself," or, "I've had a heart issue," that issue will go to Palmerston North, even
though there's an underlying condition that needs it.
It's just this messy kind of web, and it's not that the staff at St.
John's or the hospital aren't doing their best and don't want to help.
This is not a criticism of them. It's a criticism of the function that we just
can't align really simple boundaries where there's an easy option to do it.
Tim, we're out of time. I'm really sorry about that.
But I know that Mike and Andy have questions, so perhaps you can catch up with
those questions afterwards because we are out of time now.
Very happy to.
Thank you. That brings us now-- Thank you for your time on that.
Cassandra Glover.
Welcome, Cassandra. Come to the table.
Wonderful to have you here. Now, we've had your submission.
Mm-hmm.
We'll take that as read. We're looking forward to hearing your story, and thank you
for sharing that with us. We have five minutes with you, including any
time for questions. So over to you.
Okay. Well, I
live in Otaki, which is one of the problem towns that has this
issue with our health areas in one area, and all our other
areas are in Wellington area. So, we've got the problem.
I've got Parkinson's, I've got Sjogren's, and I've got Hashimoto's.
And I also have a heart murmur, apparently, and I've been referred to cardiology in
Palmerston North. But all my other specialists are in Wellington.
So that's one issue. My husband has a heart
pacemaker. He has a heart valve issue,
and he also has several VT issues. At the moment,
if we're at home, he gets taken to Palmerston North Hospital.
If he's in work in Wellington, he gets taken to Wellington or the Hutt
Hospital. The trouble is the two hospitals don't talk to each other.
When we went for a cardiologist appointment in Palmerston
North, which is where our hospital area is, they didn't have any
information from the Hutt Hospital or the Wellington Hospitals.
So it's causing us a lot of stress, this thing.
The other thing, too, is that we're in Otaki, which has no public transport to
Palmerston North.
Yeah.
So if he goes there, I've got to drive, instead of taking public
transport, which I prefer to do. If he was taken to Wellington, I could get there
quite easily. So those are sort of the issues that we've
got. Yeah.
Thank you.
The other thing is that we haven't got any issue with any of the hospitals, whether
it be St. John's or Wellington Free. They're great.
It's just this boundary problem.
Thank you. I've got a question from Melissa Lee.
Apart from the boundary, thank you so much for your submission.
I just have a question. If the hospitals were able to share, often
public
agencies are actually too worried about privacy
issues.
Mm-hmm.
And when they should be sharing information, they're not sharing information.
If they were actually instructed to share information, for example, for their
patients, do you think that would actually help, even if you were going to
different hospitals, as long as you are getting the treatment that you actually
require?
It would help, but it would be nice to be able to go in the same area
as all our other things are.
Okay.
Thank you. I've got a question from Tim, also.
Thank you, and thanks for sharing today.
So just to pick up those two points.
One,
if your partner had to go to hospital and he's taken to Palmerston North, you're
saying the only public transport available would take you to where?
The only public transport takes me to Wellington.
There's no public transport to Palmerston North as far as I'm aware.
So I hear your point, which is that it would be easier if these
all lined up so the public transport was the same way as the health and the same
way as the ambulance.
Mm-hmm.
What do you say to people that say, "Well, it's easier and cheaper for our
public servants to leave it the way it is now and to prioritize that over
prioritize helping you?"
I think that's wrong because it's causing us a lot of stress, and we've got
enough health issues as it is without the added stress.
Thank you for sharing.
Thank you. And I have a question from Andy Foster.
Yeah. I was going to ask the question that Melissa asked as well.
But two parts to the question. The first one of them is if you've different types
of treatment,
different skills that are required from the medical professionals that are
required. There's some presumably that those
skills exist in Wellington and not at Palmerston-
Mm
... or potentially vice versa. But isn't there a point there that if you have
a specialist that you need to see, that specialist is in a particular location,
you kind of got to go to them rather than go to a different hospital where they
aren't? The second one is in terms of public transport, would you be happy if
everything you did was in Wellington as opposed to Palmerston, given that we
actually don't have the public transport between Otaki-
Yeah, it would actually be-
... and Palmerston, which wouldn't be cheap. Sorry?
It would be easier if it was-
If it was all in Wellington?
Yes.
Yeah.
I'm not sure about the first question.
Oh, well, it's just basically because I know that there's only a certain number of
specialists of various different things around the country.
Yeah.
We can't magic more of them to go everywhere.
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah.
It's not the specialist fault or anything else, it's just that horrible thing.
Also, if I go for a blood test, I can't go in
Otaki. If I've got to have the rheumatologist to see
the blood tests, I've got to go in Pacific Radiology, which is in the Kaviti
area of Wellington. I can't do it in Otaki itself, so
I've got to go somewhere. And if I do an Otaki blood test,
they can't see it, and it's got to be...
It's just crazy.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's crazy.
Okay. That looks like the end of that, and it brings us to the end of our time
anyway. Look, can I say thank you very much for that. That was very helpful.
You're our first submitter, and that was a very helpful submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
Right. That brings us now to the
Māori-- no, Horowhenua District Council, and we've got
Ernie Esmeer
set online, coming in online.
Mayor Bernie. That's good.
Here we go, Mayor Bernie. Thank you for your time here this
morning.
Good morning.
Good morning. We have 10 minutes with you.
I know that you know how this works.
That's inclusive of question time as well.
So thank you very much for your time, and I will hand over to you.
I appreciate the opportunity to talk to you this morning and the early
start as well. I've got a busy day ahead of me,
just like you. Look, Horowhenua District Council supports the
Better Regional Boundaries Bill, and something that I've personally
been advocating for, for some time.
At its core, this bill addresses a simple but important issue.
The way government boundaries are currently drawn no longer
reflects how our communities actually live, work, and access services.
Many of these boundaries were established decades ago, and today they are
increasingly out of step with modern population patterns and service
needs. The result is unnecessary complexity for both
government agencies and the public they serve.
We see this across a number of essential services, including
police, courts, corrections, housing through Kainga Ora,
MSD, health services such as hospitals, PHOs,
ambulance services, and in each case, different agencies
operate on different boundaries.
For communities like ours, this creates confusion and
inefficiency, and for agency, it creates duplication and
coordination challenges.
In Horowhenua, we also see this in transport.
We sit outside the Wellington Regional Transport Service area, yet our
communities are closely connected into that wider region.
We're also already working across multiple regional councils
to try and secure better outcomes and greater alignment of
boundaries would make this significantly more effective.
The principle here is straightforward.
When boundaries are misaligned, service delivery becomes
fragmented. When they are aligned, services become
simpler, clearer, and more efficient for everybody involved.
And there's a strong parallel with local government experience.
Anyone who's had to work across both district and regional council boundaries on
a single project will understand the delays and duplication
that can result. Aligning central government boundaries would
deliver the same benefits we see locally: clarity,
certainty, and better outcomes for communities.
With the establishment of our local water entity, we've partnered
with Rangitikei and Palmerston North City.
We're already seeing service models that cross
traditional council boundaries.
At the same time, government agency boundaries remain fragmented
across these same areas. So this bill presents a
logical opportunity to bring those systems into better alignment.
We also agree with the five-year transition period.
Obviously, with the proposed changes to local government and
simplifying of local government strategies,
it will give time to be able to put those
differences into operation a lot easier as well, and in a
structured and efficient way, rather than isolation.
So we do recommend that the timing of the central government boundary realignment
be aligned with those amalgamation processes to maximize efficiency
and effectiveness.
So we do support the bill. We hope that it does come to fruition.
It would save a heck of a lot of,
we think, confusion and inefficiency that currently operates and
do support our local MP in proposing this.
Thank you.
Thanks.
We've got a question.
Yeah. Thank you, Mayor Bernie. Great to see you today and thanks to the
team and for the support. Unsolicited as it might be,
I wonder if you have
an example you could share with the committee of what this looks like in real
terms. Because we hear big pictures and we hear that, oh, look, it would be--
maybe there's cost involved, or maybe it's easier if we stay, but we don't-- It's,
I think, sometimes really helpful to hear those individual stories.
Is there one that you could share with us?
Well, I think one of the stark things for me was through the COVID
period, where often we were on Zoom calls with mayors and chief
executives across the Horizons region, where we had
three different
health boards involved in those calls because our
districts represented were placed in three different areas.
We had quite a number of-- I'm also involved
in the justice system, and I see a heck of a lot of
outside of my district appearances in my local
court, because they live in a different area.
But because the justice system
stretches further south than
Levin, then there is often those
duplications and unease.
I think your constituents in Otaki would be able to
highlight even to a greater degree the challenges around ambulance
services and the health services.
MSD is another issue.
It's
complicated. And
while
times have changed, we don't seem to have moved with it in terms of these
boundaries. And,
I know lines on a map don't necessarily mean
a heck of a lot these days. We cross over a heck of a lot.
And look, I see the future being very much a,
when we do eventually amalgamate and partner, whoever that
is with- Will actually provide an easier and more efficient
way to be able to access these sort of services that--
And I just think it makes sense that government boundaries are
aligned, or central government boundaries with agencies are aligned to
local government boundaries.
Thank you.
I have a question from Limonga Lydia Sosene.
Thank you, Bernie. Thanks for your submission this morning.
I have a quick question. What do you think the impact will be
if the Boundaries Bill goes ahead, impact will be on supply chain?
So I get that you've-- everyone's explained this morning about
central region, central government offices and local government.
What about the supply chain, the external providers of all of these different
services?
Look, I think it can simplify and make things a heck of a lot more
efficient.
Take away the confusion, take away the
necessity for communities and people in those
communities to be able to not be sure of where they should
go for the services they require. There is this
angst all the time at the moment, "Do I go to this place?
Do I go to that place?"
And I think it just makes common sense and is logical for people to
expect that the region that delivers their services like
water and
wastewater, also delivers some of their other services like
MSD, health,
policing, and things like that.
Just some sort of alignment between the two, I think would
make this country a little bit more easier to
manage.
Thank you.
Thank you, and a final question from Andy Foster.
Yeah. Hi, Bernie. Good to see you as always.
Thank you, Andy.
Look, I just wanted to ask you about boundaries generally.
You started off by talking about regional boundaries, and obviously we've got all
these discussions about
council boundaries and so on. Is there any particular reason--
We've organized regions on the base of rivers.
Most of us don't usually live in the rivers.
We're aware of the rivers and use the rivers, and we enjoy the rivers.
We don't live in the rivers. If the regions were completely
rearranged as they could be,
the conversation you started off with, which is saying, look, Horizons Manawatu is
a very large, diverse region,
parts of which don't have a lot in common other than the fact that they're on river
systems. Would that help in some way to
reduce the number of different government agencies that you were
interfacing with? If you were smaller unitary councils
covering part of what's currently your region or possibly outside your region
as well, would that deal with some of those problems?
Look, Andy, that's nice to see you.
That's one of the questions we're grappling with, with the amalgamation
conversation. Do we base ourselves on a
river catchment basis? Do
we separate rural from urban?
Do we
have a coastal affiliation?
All those sorts of questions are some of the things that we're trying to work our
way through in talking about whether we get into the Head Start
process or how we get into the Head Start process.
But,
as you say, Horizons is a massive geographical area.
It stretches from the top of Ruapehu down to here in
Manakau Harbour.
But as I said, during that COVID period, we had the
Waikato DHB, we had the Whanganui DHB, we had the
MidCentral DHB all on the same call when we were
talking about health challenges.
Now, that seems to me to be inefficient and causes lots
of confusion. To be able to say there is one board across the
whole district, that would make things a lot easier.
Now, who we amalgamate with in the future is yet to be
seen. But I would assume that hopefully,
MSD, health,
policing, corrections, those sorts of agencies could be
aligned around those boundaries.
Okay. That actually brings us to the end of the time there, and I
want to thank you very much for that this morning.
Again, another super helpful submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks, Bernie.
Okay, that brings us to Fraser Howard from the Maori Marine Whenua
Hauora Resource Research and Development Foundation.
Here yet?
Not here yet.
He said he would arrive at this.
Right, okay. So we'll just wait for
Fraser.
Since have you got mic?
Do you envision any relocation of offices?
I don't envision any new offices at Danilla.
Across the board. So no-
It's just saying this off you go and city reports are kept going to other family
members. So they all go the same direction.
And do you see--
You're open to realigning a little bit better with local government
reform because all those-
Here we go.
Welcome, Fraser. It's wonderful to have you here this morning.
We have 10 minutes with you on your submission.
And we have to be quite tight on that, but that's also inclusive of
questions. So I'm going to hand straight to you.
Okay, cool.
What bill was this, sorry? Which one?
This is the
bill that's the Better Regional Boundaries Bill.
Oh, okay. What I wanted to firstly note on that is,
because I sort of represent quite a few different iwi and hapu around
here-
And
there's quite a severe lack of
notification and
foresight from iwi and hapū, and from the
council's behalf. Yeah, there's really not enough
notification to the iwi and hapū at all that I've noticed.
And that would be the first thing that I'd be seeking, would
be iwi and hapū to be notified,
and
then you'd go from there, wouldn't you say?
But,
yeah, I think that
in between all these regions and these boundaries,
there's a lot of areas that are going neglected.
Mainly the gorge, the Manawatu Gorge.
And
we have actively, with my team, been working in
there since 2023, but
I've noticed that they're sort of creeping in on the edges of and that's what
they're trying to get at. And
we're there, and we've been there the whole time,
and it's always been occupied by Māori, and
I don't think that
their form of governance is going to make
any difference of that. And I think that
they should also be
looking, seeking other iwi and hapū, and
the public should be notified far more
appropriately.
And,
yeah.
The questions I have about that would be
that we want to well,
probably make it into some statements that we want to
be part of the governance of
the local area here, this rohe, being Kai Tahi.
So
we're from the Taranaki,
is where our standpoint comes from, and we've always had a
tie to
the gorge, and
the gorge being the center of all of this and how everybody ties
into this
land here is the Manawatu Gorge.
And
the entrance to the Manawatu Gorge being from the eastern
side,
and
that's how it all ties together. And the ridges and the boundaries are
the rivers, and the ridges and the hills are...
You can see mountain to mountain and
yeah, it's quite understandable from that perspective.
But you get to all these regional boundaries and bills
and all this paperwork, and you get confused really rapidly.
And I think that that's what's happened to the Māori standpoint
around here, is that
we're not corporate Māoris, we're actually live
flesh and blood Māori that are,
all the bills
and the laws and all that are acting as if
they've been dead long ago or something.
But no, we're here, alive, and we're well.
But,
yeah, our health is definitely impacted
when it comes to things like our whakapapa being erased
through regional boundaries and all that being changed, and
renaming of places where there
was original names that haven't even been acknowledged yet.
So how can we rename it to another name if we haven't even
acknowledged the original standing names that are still there, that you guys, you
haven't even
looked far enough into the information to find out?
So I could teach you, but it would be up to you
guys to
make some consultation and,
yeah,
a bit more formal and...
Or maybe a little bit more casual might be the way about it.
I'm not sure, but, yeah,
we definitely need to do something, and
I feel like it can probably bridge a gap between
parties for us. So, yeah, just putting it out there.
And yeah.
Thank you, Fraser. I have a question on your submission, if
that's okay.
Yeah, that's fine.
To ask you that.
You say that you're in favor or support
this particular bill,
and then you've done, in the
submission, which has been written by Wyatt by the looks of it,
it talks about
environmental and natural systems, and that should be the
natural
boundaries in the natural... Can you just give us a very quick
explanation of why that's important?
Because, like I was
hitting on before, is
the mountains and the rivers around here,
and the surrounding areas, well, this is all a
big catchment area and interconnected
waterways and
whakapapa, I suppose, as well.
Everything
crosses over here at this point. And
yeah, from right down south, all the Māori are all connected deeply through
this
area here. And
I think that it's
environmentally, we should be looking to the mountains and to the rivers
for our guidance,
because that's how it was always done in the past.
Like pou-unga would be whare iti around here.
They would go to the whare iti and they'd ask of,
"What should we do here?" You know what I mean?
And yeah, this is where I think that we've lost a bit of a
vital link to our
traditions and things that have been passed down to us.
I think we've
got to take a step back and realize who we
are and where we're at and how small we are to...
You know?
Yeah.
That's how I feel here.
Can I just say thank you for that? Because I think that's an important
consideration in any discussions that we have, is that to our
Māori view. So I appreciate you bringing that to the table
this morning.
Thank you.
So thank you. That does bring us to the end of the time here with you this
morning. But again, thank you very much for bringing that consideration to us.
Yeah, I much appreciate it. Thank you.
I'm speaking on behalf of many people, and I hope I've done a good
enough job. Yeah.
That was wonderful. Thank you very much for that.
And I do like that stuff in the background.
Yeah, somebody is going to sing for us.
Yeah.
We need the song.
That was great. Okay. Thank you, everybody.
That brings us to the conclusion of the morning session.
We'll now suspend until 1:00 PM or two minutes after the
House suspends, whichever.
Thank you.